# 3983
RNA-Seq for EcoEvo #2– Modularity of gene expression in butterfly evolution

This repository contains custom scripts for NBIS support project #3983 "RNA-Seq for EcoEvo #2– Modularity of gene expression in butterfly evolution".

## Contents (custom scripts)

* `parse_trinotate_report_ids.pl` parses report generated by `Trinotate` to obtain a list of partial gene IDs.

* `get_ids_from_fa.pl` obtains a list of full IDs (as in the original `fasta` file) based on the partial IDs from `Trinotate` report.

* `parse_reblast_arp7_v2.pl` parses results of `blast` and reciprocal `blast`

* `annotate_denovo_clusters_arp7.pl` and `annotate_denovo_clusters_arp7_top5.pl` annotate positive hits in results of reciprocal `blast` using homologue groups from [EvidentialGene: Orthology completeness of Arthropod gene assemblies](http://arthropods.eugenes.org/EvidentialGene/arthropods/Arthropod_Orthology_Completeness/). Files used are from the ARP7 release: [arp7s10f_genes.ugp.txt](http://arthropods.eugenes.org/arthropods/orthologs/ARP7/arp7bor5b/arp7s10f_genes.ugp.txt.gz) and for annotating ARP7 groups with descriptive names [arp7s10f_omclgn.consensus_def.txt](http://arthropods.eugenes.org/arthropods/orthologs/ARP7/arp7bor5b/arp7s10f_omclgn.consensus_def.txt).

 `annotate_denovo_clusters_arp7.pl` produces annotated list of ARP7 homologues using the **top hit** in the reciprocal blast;

 `annotate_denovo_clusters_arp7_top5.pl` produces annotated list of ARP7 homologues using **any of the 5 top hits** in the reciprocal blast if it belongs to the same ARP7 homologue group as the top hit.

* `integrate_homologues_counts_v0.2.1.pl` merges ARP7 homologue group (i.e. gene) level count tables from four butterfly species.


## Workflow

The workflow for annotation of *de novo* assembled transcripts used in this study is summarised below. Details are given in the project report, section *Bioinformatics Methods*.

1. `Trinotate` pipeline ([Trinotate manual](https://github.com/Trinotate/Trinotate.github.io/wiki)), including `BLAST` search for homologues: `blastp` using ORFs predicted by `TransDecoder.Predict` ([Transdecoder manual](https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder/wiki));

2. Reciprocal `BLAST` (`blastp`). All ARP7 gene IDs were used. A custom perl script `get_ids_from_fa.pl` was used to obtain full IDs
from fasta file based on a list of partial IDs output by `parse_trinotate_report_ids.pl`;

3. Parsing results of reciprocal BLAST: `parse_reblast_arp7_2018_v2.pl`;

4. Clustering of *de novo* transcripts into "genes" based on their expression level and sequence using `corset` ([corset manual](https://github.com/Oshlack/Corset/wiki)); alignment of all reads to their respective transcripts was performed first using `bowtie2`; this step produced count tables at a gene level as well as a list of `Trinity` isoform IDs and clusters (aka "corset clusters") they were assigend to.

5. Intersecting `corset` cluster IDs and reciprocal `blast` hits using script `annotate_denovo_clusters_arp7.pl`;

6. Merging count tables for four species using `integrate_homologues_counts.pl`.


## Note on common gene identifiers

Common gene identfiers were assigned using the following strategy: *de novo* transcripts
with annotation confirmed by reciprocal blast in one of the following scenarios:
confirmed as the "best hit" or confirmed as one of the "top five" hits were
assigned to ARP7 consensus group based on the identity of the blastp/reciprocal
blast best hit. Transcripts for which the initial blastp hit was confirmed as one of the
"top five" hits in reciprocal blast were further filtered to retain only hits where both
top hits from blastp and reciprocal blast belong to the same ARP7 consensus group.
The output of each of these three groups was processed separately. Corresponding
count tables were generated on a gene level for de novo transcripts annotated to
clusters output by Corset. **Only ARP6/7 groups which had 1:1 matching with a
homologous gene in each of the species were included in the final count table.** (E.g.
ARP7 consensus group which had 2 homologues in one of the species is not included
in the final count table.)
